# Chapter 1: Introduction to Computers and Programming

# Short Answer

1. Both main memory and secondary storage are types of memory. Describe the difference between the two.
   Ans.) Main Memory (aka  RAM: Random Access Memory) and secondary storage are both different types of memory. The biggest difference is that of impermanence.
      **Main Memory (MM)**: is impermanent, faster, and holds currently used instructions/programs. The   
            MM is called *Random Access* as the CPU is able to quickly access the memory at any location at *random*.
            It loses its contents should it lose power. 
            Expensive.
            Think of it as a Chef's cook bench where they hold ingredients for the recipe that they're cooking up. 
    
      **Secondary Storage**: is non-volatile long-term storage, where memory can hold data for long periods of time, even when there is no power to the computer. 
            Programs are normally stored in here and loaded onto the main memory as needed. 
            Relatively inexpensive. 
            Think of it as the Chef's fridge, more room for storing ingredients and such, but a bit of a hassle to get them out. 



2. What is the difference between system software and application software?
   Ans.) **System Software**: Software used by the OS to ensure smooth, efficient and safe operations of a computer. 
        - The restaurant's kitchen where all the delicious meals are cooked. The backend needs it's relevant logistics to ensure smooth, efficient and safe operations. 

    **Application Software (Apps)**: Software used by a user for a specific purpose. This .md being typed on an application software: VS Code to ensure long-term work posterity, committment to learning and proof that the author is trying. 
    (10 years from now, you won't be able to say that you didn't do anything.)


3. What type of software controls the internal operations of the computer’s hardware?   
   Ans.) The Operating System.

4. Why must programs written in a high-level language be translated into machine language before they can be run?
   Ans.) Simply: The language barrier between humans and computers. 
    **Humans** understand English, Arabic, Hindi, Chinese, etc. 
    **Computers** are built on Current On (1) and Current Off (0). They're fluent in binary. 

    Translation is necessary to ensure prompt communication and ensure tasks are carried out as expected.  

5. Why is it easier to write a program in a high-level language than in machine language?
   Ans.)  The monotony of coding in 0s and 1s (while close to the machine) throws humans off track and induces errors otherwise inconceivable. Makes coding, debugging, etc. ALL the more harder. 

6. Explain the difference between an object file and an executable file.
   Ans.)  When you *run* a program it initiates a translation process. 

    **Object File**: the file created after a `pre-processor` goes into the source code, *prepares* it, followed by the `compiler` which translates every statment (if free of syntax errors) into machine language instructions, i.e Object Code or File.
    
    **Executable File**: The `linker` is a program that combines the object file with the necessary library routines (other files). This generates the executable file you need to run on the computer. 


7. What is the difference between a syntax error and a logical error?
  Ans.) **Syntax Error**: Error in program grammar. 
        **Logic Error**: aka bug, error in programming logic. 

### Fill-in-the-Blank

8. Computers can do many different jobs because they can be _________. `Programmed`
9. The job of the _________ is to fetch instructions, carry out the operations commanded by the instructions, and produce some outcome or resultant information. `CPU`
10. The __________ is the part of a computer in which programs actually execute. `CPU`
11. The main memory is commonly known as __________. `RAM - Random Access Memory`
12. The two general categories of software are _________ and _________.  `System and Application`
13. A program is a set of _________. `Sequential instructions`
14. A(n) __________ is an ordered set of steps written in human language to perform a task or to solve any problem. ` Algorithm`
15. _________ is the only language computers really process.  `Machine Language (strings of 0s and 1s)`
16. _________ languages are close to the level of humans in terms of readability. `High Level`
17. C++ is a high-level language that has __________ features. `Low-level`
18. A program's ability to run on several different types of computer systems is called _________. `Portability` 
19. Words that have special meaning in a programming language are called _________. `Key Words`
20. Words or names defined by the programmer are called _________. `Variables`
21. A(n) __________ translates each source code instruction to the equivalent machine language instruction(s). `Compiler`
22. __________ characters or symbols mark the beginning or end of programming statements, or separate items in a list. `Punctuation`
23. The statement `#include <iostream>` is a(n) __________. `Preprocessor Directive`
24. A(n) __________ is a named storage location. `Variable`
25. When data is stored in a variable, it is actually stored in the __________ of the computer. `Memory (if currently being run) or Storage (if persistence storage needed)`
26. The three primary activities of a program are __________, __________, and __________. `Input, Process, Output`
27. __________ is information a program gathers from the outside world. `Input`
28. A(n) __________ is a diagrammatic representation of the logical flow of a program. `Flow Chart`
29. A(n) __________ is a diagram that graphically illustrates the structure of a program.  `Hierarchy Chart`

### Algorithm Workbench
Draw hierarchy charts or flowcharts that depict the programs described below. (See Appendix C for instructions on creating flowcharts.) 

###### 30. Available Credit
The following steps should be followed in a program that calculates a customer’s available credit:
1. Display the message “Enter the customer’s maximum credit.”
2. Wait for the user to enter the customer’s maximum credit.
3. Display the message “Enter the amount of credit used by the customer.”
4. Wait for the user to enter the customer’s credit used.
5. Subtract the used credit from the maximum credit to get the customer’s available credit.
6. Display a message that shows the customer’s available credit.
 
  //------------------------------------------------------------
  #include <iostream>
  using namespace std;

  int main(){
    double maximumCredit = 0, usedCredit = 0;

    cout << "Please Enter the customer's maximum credit: $";
    cin >> maximumCredit;

    cout << endl << "Please enter the amount of credit that a customer's used: $";
    cin >> usedCredit;

    cout << endl << "Available Credit: $" << maximumCredit - usedCredit << endl;

    
    return 0;
  }
   //------------------------------------------------------------

###### 31. Sales Tax
Design a hierarchy chart or flowchart for a program that calculates the total of a retail
sale. The program should ask the user for:
– The retail price of the item being purchased
– The sales tax rate
Once these items have been entered, the program should calculate and display:
– The sales tax for the purchase
– The total of the sale

 //------------------------------------------------------------
  #include <iostream>
  using namespace std;

  int main(){
    double MSRP = 0, salesTax = 0;
    
    cout << endl << "Please enter the Retail Price of the item being purchased: ";
    cin >> MSRP;

    cout << endl << "Please enter the Sales Tax Rate: ";    
    cin >> salesTax;

    cout << "Total: $" << MSRP + ((MSRP * salesTax) / 100); //Sales Price: 1 + (1 * Tax %)
    


  return 0;
  }
  //------------------------------------------------------------

32. Account Balance
Design a hierarchy chart or flowchart for a program that calculates the current balance
in a savings account. The program must ask the user for:
– The starting balance
– The total dollar amount of deposits made
– The total dollar amount of withdrawals made
– The monthly interest rate
Once the program calculates the current balance, it should be displayed on the screen.
VideoNote
Designing
the Account
Balance
Program58 Chapter 1 Introduction to Computers and Programming
Predict the Result
Questions 33–35 are programs expressed as English statements. What would each display
on the screen if they were actual programs?

33. The variable x starts with the value 0.
The variable y starts with the value 5.
Add 1 to x.
Add 1 to y.
Add x and y, and store the result in y.
Display the value in y on the screen.

34. The variable x starts with the value 20.
The variable y starts with the value 10.
Store the value of x in a variable t.
Store the value of y in x.
Store the value of t in y.
Display the value of x on the screen.
Display the value of y on the screen.

35. The variable a starts with the value 1.
The variable b starts with the value 10.
The variable c starts with the value 100.
The variable x starts with the value 0.
Store the value of c times 3 in x.
Add the value of b times 6 to the value already in x.
Add the value of a times 5 to the value already in x.
Display the value in x on the screen.
Find the error

36. The following pseudocode algorithm has an error. The program is supposed to ask the
user for the length and width of a rectangular room, then display the room’s area. The
program must multiply the width by the length in order to determine the area. Find
the error.
area = width × length.
Display “What is the room’s width?”.
Input width.
Display “What is the room’s length?”.
Input length.
Display area.
VideoNote